ETCD-514: Add etcd size tuning (#1549)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/etcd/etcd-size-tuning.md

  - "@hasbro17, etcd team lead"
  - "@tjungblu, etcd team"
  - "@Elbehery, etcd team"
  - "@williamcaban, Openshift product manager"
  - "@soltysh, Openshift staff engineer"
approvers: # A single approver is preferred, the role of the approver is to raise important questions, help ensure the enhancement receives reviews from all applicable areas/SMEs, and determine when consensus is achieved such that the EP can move forward to implementation.  Having multiple approvers makes it difficult to determine who is responsible for the actual approval.
  - "@hasbro17, etcd team lead"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - None
creation-date: 2024-01-24
last-updated: 2024-01-24
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ETCD-514
---

# etcd Size Tuning

## Summary

Thie enhancement would replace the hardcoded value for the etcd backend database quota with predefined profiles.

> Each profile would map to predefined, and pretested, values for the internal parameter.

Reviewer: I like the idea of a quantity over enums too. Seems like we have precedence for that in the API already. Without any validation though.
https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/e2ce40831f2ec58c3aa06e0ecd1c17a647115c94/machineconfiguration/v1/types.go#L678-L687

I see resource.Quantity also allows milli values for specifying cores though.
https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/f14778da5523847e4c07346e3161a4b4f6c9186e/pkg/api/resource/quantity_example_test.go#L48

Beyond parsing and validation in the controller, would we need CEL validation to disallow that?

We will need to work with the perf team to understand the memory requirements of largers quotas, and the effect of the quota on things like defragmentation.
A downside is that with the profiles, discussed in the Alternatives section, there are a discrete, small, number of permutations to test, giving more confidence of the exact effects a given profile has on performance/memory requirements.
This is a minor consideration as setting the quota to a arbitrarily higher value does not mean that etcd will take up that much space; it will depend on the workload.

### Workflow Description

1. The cluster administrator decides to change the etcd backend quota from the default (8GiB) to a larger value; e.g. 20GiB.
2. They set the new value in the API server.
3. An etcd redeployment will be automatically run which restarts the etcd pods which consume the new value.

#### Variation [optional]

1. The cluster administrator wants to set the quota from a larger value (e.g. 32GiB) to a smaller one (8GiB).
2. They attempt to set the new value in the API server.
3. The API server should return an error notifying them that the value is invalid - not allowed to shrink the quota.

### API Extensions

> None

Reviewer: Can we outline the API here to discuss the naming/placement and validation.
i.e https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1736

  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ETCD-514
---

# etcd Size Tuning

## Summary

This enhancement would replace the hardcoded value for the etcd backend database quota with a human readable, configurable value; 8GiB.
This enhancement only covers the mvp for a tech preview release of this new feature; a future enhancement will be necessary.

## Motivation

Customers have asked for the ability to increase the quota for the backend database to faciliate larger clusters.
Specifically, in our build clusters, the number of namespaces and CRDs (and the size of the CRDs) have been increasing which drastically increase the amount of data stored in etcd.
In 4.14, the perf team is now unable to run their benchmark suite.
We want to be able to allow for this while minimizing the risk of them setting values that cause issues.

### User Stories

* As an administrator, I want to change the etcd backend size to decrease the risk of quota reached errors in very large clusters.
* As an Openshift support, I want to walk a customer through changing the etcd size in a minimal number of steps.

> * As an etcd engineer, I want to easily add and test new sizes for performance impacts on both large and small clusters.

Reviewer 2: As an SRE, I want to safely scale up the size of etcd without impacting the availability of dependent components.

### Goals

* Add a configuration option using resource.Quantity to allow for human readable values; i.e. 16GiB.
* Remove the parameters from the podspec rendering and replace with the value.
* Add an API to allow admins to change the value.

> * Add blocker to disallow shrinking the size once set to a larger value.

Reviewer 2: Prevent resizing of etcd into an un-safe operational condition where its new size impacts control plane components due to available resources.

### Non-Goals

* Handle consuming value changes without an etcd rollout.

## Proposal

Allow the customer/admin access to set the backend quota directly through a human readable value. The only restriction is that they are disallowed from setting the value lower than the current.

The default value or unset value would be the current, hardcoded backend quota: 8GiB. This would allow for upgrades where this configuration value wouldn't nesscessarily be set.

This would allow for more flexibility, but would also likely increase the number of support cases as the memory requirements will be higher: changing quota from 8GiB to 16GiB is not double the memory, it'll be 6x the memory since each etcd member could take up to 16GiB.

> We will need to work with the perf team to understand the memory requirements of largers quotas, and the effect of the quota on things like defragmentation.

Reviewer: Didn't see an upper limit specified elsewhere so as part of the proposal we should specify an upper limit e.g 64 GB. 

With a note on the need to test with the perf scale team what a reasonable and safe upper bound would be before we GA this.

Also mention the upper limit in the API extensions section below so it's clear.

Reviewer 3: Are there any other constraints on what values make sense? For example, does the limit need to be a power of 2? Is 8 the minimum?

Reviewer: > does the limit need to be a power of 2

No limitation from etcd that I'm aware of. This limit just dictates the size of the DB file which is mapped into memory.

> Is 8 the minimum?

The upstream limit by default is 2GB https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/dev-guide/limit/#storage-size-limit
However we've always configured this as 8GB by default for openshift.
We're not aiming to change the default yet, and we don't want to allow decreasing the limit so customers don't write lock the cluster if they accidentally reduce it to less than what's being used by their cluster.

For the upper limit, 64GB is a ballpark figure. Others have safely gone as high as 100GB.
https://www.cncf.io/blog/2019/05/09/performance-optimization-of-etcd-in-web-scale-data-scenario/

But there may be other constraints on the size of the DB file such as the time to restore, and transporting the snapshot to a new member could be slow depending on the hardware.

We'll have to test out those constraints on the upper limit that we choose here.

A downside is that with the profiles, discussed in the Alternatives section, there are a discrete, small, number of permutations to test, giving more confidence of the exact effects a given profile has on performance/memory requirements.
This is a minor consideration as setting the quota to a arbitrarily higher value does not mean that etcd will take up that much space; it will depend on the workload.

### Workflow Description

1. The cluster administrator decides to change the etcd backend quota from the default (8GiB) to a larger value; e.g. 20GiB.
2. They set the new value in the API server.
3. An etcd redeployment will be automatically run which restarts the etcd pods which consume the new value.

#### Variation [optional]

1. The cluster administrator wants to set the quota from a larger value (e.g. 32GiB) to a smaller one (8GiB).
2. They attempt to set the new value in the API server.
3. The API server should return an error notifying them that the value is invalid - not allowed to shrink the quota.

### API Extensions

In operator/v1/0000_12_etcd-operator_01_config-TechPreviewNoUpgrade.crd.yaml:
- Add BackendSizeQuota of type *resource.Quantity
  - With default '8GiB'.

>   - With validation disallow a decrease in value.

Reviewer 3: If the max is 64GiB and the minimum is 8GiB, and if CEL supports saying "this value may not shrink", then it might be more natural for the API field to have a name like `backendQuotaGiB` and be an integer.

How will an admin who changes the quota know when their change is done taking effect? Is there already a field in the status portion of the API to report the size being used, for example?

>   - With validation disallow a decrease in value.

Reviewer 4: > a name like backendQuotaGiB and be an integer.

indeed. I think that's a good compromise between readability and ease of validation.

The `resource.Quantity` would give the option for fractional values like `5.6GiB` or `5600MiB`, but I don't think it's worth going below the gigabyte sizes here. ushift as an SKU would be a concern, but it's not running the CEO to manage etcd.

>   - With validation disallow a decrease in value.

Reviewer 4: In case anyone ever wonders how such a validation would look like and before it gets lost in our internal slack:

> +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self.CmpInt64(oldSelf)>0",message="can't decrease database size"

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

None

### Risks and Mitigations

* We will need to test the larger size to ensure that everything works as expected; especially defragmentation.

> * Defragmentation, and its effects, will need to be tested as the API server will be unresponsive during this time; we will need to understand the general magnitude of defrag time and documentation those expectations.

Reviewer 2: This will impact API Server SLOs. Having a bigger size, greater defragmentation == less potential availability for the apiserver. SLA implications for managed services.

Reviewer 4: managed services do not defrag via the etcd operator. I also just want to leave a quick note that etcd still has two functional other members to reach while CEO defragments one, so I doubt this causes any availability issues.

@dusk125 can you update the scope/non-goals to not apply to managed services please? And maybe defuse this section, the etcd member under defrag will not be able to serve any writes, that doesn't mean the apiserver is unavailable.

Reviewer 2: etcd API would be where my assumption was wrong

* Downgrades may be impacted if:
  1. The downgrade is to a version without this feature.
  2. The quota has been set higher than the default.
  3. The etcd backends are using more space than the default.
  A mitigation would be to keep the quota at the higher value (with no way of decreasing it), so that the cluster will continue to function and no data will be lost.

### Drawbacks

* There will be a required etcd rollout when changing values, this happens automatically by the Cluster Etcd Operator to re-render the etcd podspec.

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

For each of these, we would need to compare against the current default of 8GiB. Increasing the quota does not necessarily increase the following, but at the extreme case (e.g. increase to 16GiB and using nearly that much) we expect the following to perform differently.

> * How much memory do we require for a given database size?

Reviewer 5: I was wondering should we add a validation or at least a warning explaining which quota size requires how much memory? We should strive to protect users from shooting in the foot, but using 64GB quota on small machines.

> * How long does it take to sync a snapshot of a given size to another peer; for reboot/recovery?

Reviewer 2: Should consider reframing this to "what is an acceptable amount of downtime for the apiserver during this process"

* How long does it take to compact & defrag a database of a given size?

### Test Plan

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

We will need to test a cluster with a larger quota to ensure everything works as expected.
We should also load the database with a larger quota and make note of the memory requirements of a defragmentation.
  - We should do this with some values we could assume a customer would use; 16GiB, 32GiB, 100GiB (in the extreme).
We need to test that it is not possible to shrink the quota once it has be set to a larger value.

### Graduation Criteria

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

None

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- Customer feedback
- API extension
- Value change with minimal disruption
- Performance testing for some larger-than-default values
- End user documentation
  - Description of the feature and expectations of memory usages for some largers values.
  - Steps to change the value.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

N/A

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A

> #### Failure Modes

Reviewer 2: Should this resize be preventing during a CPMS scaling event?

Reviewer 4: not sure how setting an env variable via static pods would create any downtime or should be prevented for CPMS updates, care to elaborate?

Reviewer 2: assuming there is timeouts on the resize operation, if attempting to perform this during a control plane scaling event may cause it to fail? Just wondering about what potential failure modes may become apparent.

Reviewer 2: Thank you for the education

> N/A

Reviewer 3: What happens if they ask for more space than is available, especially in an on-prem configuration where dynamic storage allocation may not be possible?

Reviewer: That's a good point.
@dusk125 @Elbehery We should point this out by checking this failure mode and see if etcd has any mechanisms to detect this. I suspect no, and it will eventually exhaust the disk space if the limit is greater than the available storage and not applicable but would be good to confirm.

Or actually if the db in usage size grows larger than the available memory, I would think the etcd pod could get OOM killed as well.

Reviewer 4: etcd does not detect this, but we can add an alert. Not sure we have disk space metrics in prometheus though. 

Also imagine the case where one CP node has less disk available (eg due to bigger log files on the same partition). In an ideal world we would need to gather the metrics for all CP node disks utilization and decide.

Ideally would be a quota, or even a dedicated disk drive / partition that we can rely on - but that's sadly not the happy path installation experience in OCP as of today.

> db in usage size grows larger than the available memory

That's okay and not a problem. It's a memory mapped file, not an in-memory-file :)

Given the perf test results from [1] I would also assume apiserver going OOM long before etcd even gets there. Where we both have CP memory alerts on. 

[1] https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1a_LiZzWgCepx0ywrO4nmNqMEpdtuU0j9CcrSViX6Vjs/edit#slide=id.g2a7e4538e11_0_64

Reviewer 5: See my other comment about ram, which should also be cross-checked with storage.

#### Support Procedures

- If the user attempts to set the quota to an invalid value (not in the form of a resource quantity (e.g. 8GiB, etc)), the API will not accept the value and return an error.

> - If the user attempts to set the quota to a lower value than the current (e.g. 21GiB -> 16GiB), the API will not accept the value and return an error.

Reviewer 3: How can an admin monitor the rollout of the change? What if that rollout gets stuck (say 1 of the control plane hosts doesn't have enough space, but the other 2 do), where do they look for debugging information to understand what's going on?

Reviewer 4: @dhellmann the setting in question is merely a quota in an env variable. Increasing it has no immediate effect on resource utilization. Monitoring a static pod rollout would be just inspecting `oc get etcd/cluster` as usual.

@dusk125 can we also clarify this somewhere? it seems most people understand that after setting it you're suddenly down 50 gigs of disk space and the whole control plane is at an availability risk.

## Implementation History

None

## Alternatives

> ### Discrete Profile values

Reviewer 3: This seems like an interesting idea, why was it rejected?

Reviewer: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1549#discussion_r1465215686

Having a fully configurable limit lets customers better fit the limit to their own available memory.
The actual memory use will also be anything up to the limit (with some overhead for other things like the WAL file).

As long as the max limit is safe to use, discretizing the allowed limits in between (e.g in steps 16 GB, 32 GB, 64GB) provides no benefit in terms of performance or safety of the etcd cluster. Maybe a simpler API with enums but it trades off better utilization of the available resources.

Reviewer 3: It would be good to capture that in the doc.

  - "@hasbro17, etcd team lead"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - None
creation-date: 2024-01-24
last-updated: 2024-03-12
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ETCD-514
---

# etcd Size Tuning

## Summary

This enhancement would replace the hardcoded value for the etcd backend database quota with a human readable, configurable value; 8GiB. This value does not immediately reserve disk space for etcd; it is an upper limit to the size of the etcd database on disk.
This enhancement only covers the mvp for a tech preview release of this new feature; a future enhancement will be necessary.

## Motivation

Customers have asked for the ability to increase the quota for the backend database to faciliate larger clusters.

> Specifically, in our build clusters, the number of namespaces and CRDs (and the size of the CRDs) have been increasing which drastically increase the amount of data stored in etcd.

Reviewer 6: cc @williamcaban

> Specifically, in our build clusters, the number of namespaces and CRDs (and the size of the CRDs) have been increasing which drastically increase the amount of data stored in etcd.

Reviewer 5: This is about all kind of build/CI/CD clusters, for example our customers using tekton ci run into similar problems. I'd rephrase in general CI/CD/pipeline clusters. Our build clusters are the closest to us, but not the only ones requesting this topic.

This is a minor consideration as setting the quota to a arbitrarily higher value does not mean that etcd will take up that much space; it will depend on the workload.

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible deploying and maintaining the cluster.

1. The cluster administrator decides to change the etcd backend quota from the default (8GiB) to a larger value; e.g. 20GiB.
2. They set the new value via the `etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1` API.
3. An etcd redeployment will be automatically run which restarts the etcd pods which consume the new value.

#### Invalid value

1. The cluster administrator wants to set the quota from a larger value (e.g. 32GiB) to a smaller one (8GiB).
2. They attempt to set the new value via the `etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1` API.
3. The API server should return an error notifying them that the value is invalid - not allowed to shrink the quota.

### API Extensions

In operator/v1/0000_12_etcd-operator_01_config-TechPreviewNoUpgrade.crd.yaml:
- Add BackendQuotaGiB of type int64
  - With default '8GiB'.
  - With validation disallow a decrease in value.
  - With an upper limit of '64GiB'.

```go
type EtcdSpec struct {

>   // BackendQuotaGiB sets the etcd backend storage size limit in gibibytes. Defaults to 8GiB.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  // BackendQuotaGiB sets the etcd backend storage size limit in giga bytes. Defaults to 8GiB.
```

Reviewer 4: Gibibytes is correct, because we translate into base-2, don't we?

  // +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
  // +kubebuilder:default=8
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum=64

>   // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self.CmpInt64(oldSelf)>0",message="can't decrease database size"

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self >= oldSelf",message="can't decrease database size"
```

Reviewer 6: during running the e2e test against these changes, `CmpInt64` failed.

Reviewer 4: int64 does not implement CmpInt64

2. They set the new value via the `etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1` API.
3. An etcd redeployment will be automatically run which restarts the etcd pods which consume the new value.

#### Invalid value

1. The cluster administrator wants to set the quota from a larger value (e.g. 32GiB) to a smaller one (8GiB).
2. They attempt to set the new value via the `etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1` API.
3. The API server should return an error notifying them that the value is invalid - not allowed to shrink the quota.

### API Extensions

In operator/v1/0000_12_etcd-operator_01_config-TechPreviewNoUpgrade.crd.yaml:
- Add BackendQuotaGiB of type int64
  - With default '8GiB'.
  - With validation disallow a decrease in value.
  - With an upper limit of '32GiB'.

```go
type EtcdSpec struct {
  // BackendQuotaGiB sets the etcd backend storage size limit in gibibytes. Defaults to 8GiB.
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
  // +kubebuilder:default=8
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum=32
  // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self>=oldSelf",message="can't decrease database size"

>   // +openshift:enable:FeatureGates=EtcdBackendQuota

Reviewer 6: @tjungblu wdyt about the naming (i.e. FeatureGate=EtcdBackendQuota) 

or shall we keep it `BackendQuotaGiB` as the field name ? 

cc @soltysh @deads2k

* As an Openshift support, I want to walk a customer through changing the etcd size in a minimal number of steps.
* As an etcd engineer, I want to easily add and test new sizes for performance impacts on both large and small clusters.

### Goals

* Allow configuration of the backend limit via human readable units: 16GiB.
* Add an API to allow admins to change the value.
* The backend limit can only be increased and not decreased.

### Non-Goals

* Handle consuming value changes without an etcd rollout.

## Proposal

Allow the customer/admin access to set the backend quota directly through a human readable value via the etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1 techpreview field. The only restriction is that they are disallowed from setting the value lower than the current.

Increasing this value will not have etcd immediately reserve this space on disk, it just allows etcd to grow up to that value if etcd grows under the usage of the cluster.

The default value or unset value would be the current, hardcoded backend quota: 8GiB. This would allow for upgrades where this configuration value wouldn't nesscessarily be set.

> An initial upper limit of 32GiB will be enforced so as to limit the impact of some etcd operations, like restore, transporting snapshots, etc. 32GiB is an arbitrary value and work with the Perf-Scale team will need to be done to validate this value and potentially increase the upper limit; finding a reasonable and safe upper bound will need to be done before this feature is made GA.

Reviewer 5: Based on the work in https://issues.redhat.com/browse/PERFSCALE-2881 this is not arbitrary number anymore. But rather a proven value, where our perf team tested up to 40G being the point where cluster was unstable and unrecoverable.

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible deploying and maintaining the cluster.

1. The cluster administrator decides to change the etcd backend quota from the default (8GiB) to a larger value; e.g. 20GiB.
2. They set the new value via the `etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1` API.
3. An etcd redeployment will be automatically run which restarts the etcd pods which consume the new value.

#### Invalid value

1. The cluster administrator wants to set the quota from a larger value (e.g. 32GiB) to a smaller one (8GiB).
2. They attempt to set the new value via the `etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1` API.
3. The API server should return an error notifying them that the value is invalid - not allowed to shrink the quota.

### API Extensions

In operator/v1/0000_12_etcd-operator_01_config-TechPreviewNoUpgrade.crd.yaml:
- Add BackendQuotaGiB of type int64
  - With default '8GiB'.
  - With validation disallow a decrease in value.
  - With an upper limit of '32GiB'.

```go
type EtcdSpec struct {
  // BackendQuotaGiB sets the etcd backend storage size limit in gibibytes. Defaults to 8GiB.
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Optional

>   // +kubebuilder:default=8

Reviewer 6: I have a case to argue about the default value tag 

- you can find in the default [test](blob:https://prow.ci.openshift.org/009d7cee-20a8-4c1f-9ba4-be4f99a8314c), that expects the `EtcdSpec` to be empty, it expects  `"backendQuotaGiB": <int64>8` 
- this is due to the fact that the field is not a pointer
- since the field is `int64` it should defaults to `0`
- however, because of this tag, it defaults to `8`
- I propose to replace the default tag with ` +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum=8` to avoid these issues
- However, as I have initially proposed a `pointer` field would have been more suitable to avoid these situations

Possible solutions 

- use Pointer field
- use `+kubebuilder:validation:Minimum=8`

cc @tjungblu @dusk125 @hasbro17 @deads2k @soltysh

Reviewer 6: see https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1736#issuecomment-2069623428 for details

Reviewer 6: first time that the integration passed 🟢  [link](https://prow.ci.openshift.org/view/gs/test-platform-results/pr-logs/pull/openshift_api/1736/pull-ci-openshift-api-master-integration/1782424939345743872)

I used these tags, can u please update the enhancement accordingly 

```
        // BackendQuotaGiB sets the etcd backend storage size limit in gibibytes. Defaults to 8GiB.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum=8
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum=32
	// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self>=oldSelf",message="can't decrease database size"
	// +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=EtcdBackendQuota
	// +optional
```

* How long does it take to sync a snapshot of a given size to another peer; for reboot/recovery?
* How long does it take to compact & defrag a database of a given size?
  * Defragmentation will pause writes to etcd, reads from etcd will be unaffected.

## Test Plan

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

We will need to test a cluster with a larger quota to ensure everything works as expected.
We should also load the database with a larger quota and make note of the memory requirements of a defragmentation.
  - We should do this with some values we could assume a customer would use; 16GiB, 32GiB, 100GiB (in the extreme).
We need to test that it is not possible to shrink the quota once it has be set to a larger value.

## Graduation Criteria

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

None

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

### Tech Preview -> GA

- Known issue in API Server

>   - When the API server restarts, it's currently possible for all watchers to be reset at the same time and request a large amount of data from etcd, leading to a crash-loop in the API server.

Reviewer 5: This was also brought up in the slack, we want to ensure we have a ready procedure for cases when the cluster enters the crash-loop with apiserver. Even after apiserver fixes both bits:
- apistreaming 
- cbor for CRDs
The team will have to create condition to get to the point where we are still able to create that crash-loop and write down a document how to recover from such a state. 

Also I'd like to see both of the above apiserver dependencies (ideally with links to upstream KEPs) being explicitly linked in this proposal, so it's easier to track the current status of those.

An initial upper limit of 32GiB will be enforced due to the [Perf-Scale work](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/PERFSCALE-2881) that proved 32GiB was a maximally stable value: higher values than 34GiB would introduce increasing instability.

We will need to work with the perf team to understand the memory requirements of largers quotas, and the effect of the quota on things like defragmentation, snapshot restore, etc.
A downside is that with the profiles, discussed in the Alternatives section, there are a discrete, small, number of permutations to test, giving more confidence of the exact effects a given profile has on performance/memory requirements.
This is a minor consideration as setting the quota to a arbitrarily higher value does not mean that etcd will take up that much space; it will depend on the workload.

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible deploying and maintaining the cluster.

1. The cluster administrator decides to change the etcd backend quota from the default (8GiB) to a larger value; e.g. 20GiB.
2. They set the new value via the `etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1` API.

> 3. An etcd redeployment will be automatically run which restarts the etcd pods which consume the new value.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3. An etcd redeployment will be automatically run which restarts the etcd pods with the new quota set.
```

#### Invalid value

1. The cluster administrator wants to set the quota from a larger value (e.g. 32GiB) to a smaller one (8GiB).
2. They attempt to set the new value via the `etcd.operator.openshift.io/v1` API.
3. The API server should return an error notifying them that the value is invalid - not allowed to shrink the quota.

### API Extensions

In operator/v1/0000_12_etcd-operator_01_config-TechPreviewNoUpgrade.crd.yaml:
- Add BackendQuotaGiB of type int64
  - With default '8GiB'.
  - With validation disallow a decrease in value.
  - With an upper limit of '32GiB'.

```go
type EtcdSpec struct {
  // BackendQuotaGiB sets the etcd backend storage size limit in gibibytes. Defaults to 8GiB.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum=8
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum=32
	// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self>=oldSelf",message="can't decrease database size"
	// +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=EtcdBackendQuota
	// +optional

>   BackendQuotaGiB int64 `json:"backendQuotaGiB"`

Reviewer 7: Given discussion on the API, this value will always be between 8 and 32. An `int32` would be sufficient here (only `int32` and `int64` are supported kinds of ints for Kube APIs)

Reviewer 6: `lgtm` 👍🏽  

I will update the API here 

@dusk125  would you kindly update the enhancement accordingly ?

Author: I'm good with that, I'll update

>   BackendQuotaGiB int32 `json:"backendQuotaGiB"`

Reviewer 5: This will need to be updated once https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1736 merges, but that's not a blocker.

Since Hypershift does not deploy the cluster etcd operator it can not make use of this feature automatically; it would need to handle detecting the change in the api and rolling out the etcd containers with the new quota. [It configures the quota itself.](https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/blob/main/control-plane-operator/controllers/hostedcontrolplane/etcd/reconcile.go#L408)

#### Standalone Clusters

This change should operate as expected on standalone clusters.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

This feature should not change the resource consumption of a single-node OpenShift deployment. If an admin decides to increase the quota, the same caveats, from normal OpenShift, about disk space will apply - etcd will not immediately reserve the quota-size, but could grow up to the quota and exhaust disk space in the process.

This enhancement will not directly impact MicroShift as the api will be consume via the Cluster Etcd Operator.
[Also, changing this value is already supported in the MicroShift configuration](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/config/etcd.go#L18).

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> * Add a configuration option using resource.Quantity to allow for human readable values; i.e. 16GiB.

Reviewer 7: Is this still accurate?

* Remove the parameters from the podspec rendering and replace with the value.

### Risks and Mitigations

* We will need to test larger sizes to ensure that everything works as expected.
* For a larger database, defragmentation of etcd will take longer which will increase the amount of time that etcd is unavaiable for writes.
  Etcd will still be available for reads during defragmentation, so there should be little impact on the apiserver's availability.
* Downgrades may be impacted if:

>   1. The downgrade is to a version without this feature.

Reviewer 5: Probably worth considering a way to resolve this problem in the future, not a blocker atm.

Reviewer 5: One potential approach would be to add a check that this is not set in a version prior to when this feature goes GA. To prevent that kind of downgrade, or even block it.

* How long does it take to sync a snapshot of a given size to another peer; for reboot/recovery?
* How long does it take to compact & defrag a database of a given size?
  * Defragmentation will pause writes to etcd, reads from etcd will be unaffected.

## Test Plan

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

We will need to test a cluster with a larger quota to ensure everything works as expected.
We should also load the database with a larger quota and make note of the memory requirements of a defragmentation.
  - We should do this with some values we could assume a customer would use; 16GiB, 32GiB, 100GiB (in the extreme).
We need to test that it is not possible to shrink the quota once it has be set to a larger value.

## Graduation Criteria

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

None

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

### Tech Preview -> GA

- Known issue in API Server
  - When the API server restarts, it's currently possible for all watchers to be reset at the same time and request a large amount of data from etcd, leading to a crash-loop in the API server.

>   - [https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4453](API Streaming)

Reviewer 5: I'd suggest pointing to the enhancement tracking issue which is https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3157
